RESTRAIN ANGER.

Do not be quick to anger with anyone, for you will often realize that you have misinterpreted the matter at hand. If, in the meantime, you act out of anger, you will suffer a loss.

For a weak spirit or inglorious modesty is easily moved by injury, especially such that you know you cannot change, much less be harmed.

If your lord rebukes you, hide your sense of injury and do not flee immediately. It is not the mark of a prudent servant to depart from an angry lord.

If you are harmed, it is best to conceal it, for conflict breeds conflict, and peace is lost; and although you may overcome the other person, it will be harder than simply winning, and in the meantime, you will provoke more against you.

When dealing with those who speak ironically or maliciously, it is best to respond with understanding, but respond honestly to their words, not to their intentions, and meanwhile, pretend to be occupied with other concerns.

If someone attacks you with insults, do not name them, but rather focus on the action that has made you suspicious, and seriously accuse the same action. Expose the wickedness of such people as if you were completely unaware, or pretend not to understand, and respond to everything else. However, if they even name you, act as if they were not serious against you but pretending to be angry, then offer playful words that do not sting them but lead to laughter, or rebuke yourself along with them as if there were a third person present. Afterward, when the matter is over, with a lighter touch, skillfully tease them, showing how futile the cause is.

If you happen to be received by someone in a less than fitting manner, conceal your displeasure and animosity, and behave as if you were honorably received. Thus, their rudeness will be their punishment, and their confusion and error will be compensated by your kindness.

Your nobility will be renewed if someone enters into new honors, praise the good parts of their old bloodline; make the same case for other situations.

If you are openly attacked with insults, and there is no place for pretense, have a playful response or a little story ready that will serve both purposes in turn, through which a path may be prepared for other conversations. In this case, when someone offers letters with a given signal, say that something amusing has happened to you unexpectedly, and it will be called for viewing.

Leave time for the enemy to realize the indignity of their actions. However, do not present it to them, lest there be a cause for anger on your part. If someone is determined to complete a task within a specific time, and in the meantime something occurs, beware of such proposals.
