Typographus to the Reader:

An Italian Prince sent me this political treatise to be brought to light. I had delayed putting it to print due to being heavily occupied with various tasks, but now, by the order of the same Most Excellent Prince, I make it public.

The subject matter of dignity and the name of the Most Eminent Cardinal Mazarin, to whose life's measure and standard the matters presented here are adorned and composed, are added to the not insignificant weight of political rules that are commonly proposed.

For it has escaped no one how the Most Eminent Prince was immersed in the most severe storms and nearly submerged. Still, by what arts he overcame those various adversities of fortune, from which he seemed destined to be overwhelmed, and ultimately reached the port of salvation most happily, is not so readily apparent.

In those perilous and most difficult times, he applied the greatest power in the administration of a most powerful kingdom, torn apart by various factions, and emerged from numerous and diverse difficulties, obtaining glory.

It is no small testament to his glory that, before ascending the throne, he imbued the spirit of LOUIS XIV, easily the greatest of all the Kings of France, with the precepts of ruling. By following these precepts in taking the reins of the kingdom, France greatly expanded its borders far and wide, elevating it to the highest pinnacle of dignity and power.

It is difficult to summarize this; however, this treatise will lighten your burden, and since no complete and definitive system of political precepts exists, as particular circumstances vary the general rules to a great extent and are infinite, no easier or more successful method can be handed down than if we adapt those general rules to those particular circumstances on which they depend, transforming the discipline based solely on general precepts from theoretical to practical or active.

You will more easily achieve this goal, kind reader, if you strive to observe this illustrious example before your eyes, to which today's politicians, who seek to adapt and accommodate their rules of prudence to the prototype of political leaders and standard-bearers, model themselves.

Yet, I would like you to conduct yourself in such a way that, indeed, you have a clear view of the norms of reason that politicians are accustomed to using, not to deceive, but to avoid being deceived. By joining both these supreme norms of prudence, which prescribe the general rule of equity and justice, as well as the evangelical precept: "Do not do to others what you do not want done to yourself; be wise as serpents, and innocent as doves," enjoy the fruits of my labor and farewell.
