# II. Grendel

Then at dawn, with the break of day, Grendel's deeds were made known to men; then after their feasting was wailing uplifted, a great cry in the morning. The renowned ruler, a noble long good, sat empty of joy; the strong one suffered, sorrowing for his thanes, when they beheld the track of the loathsome foe, the accursed spirit. That struggle was too strong, too long-lasting and loathsome.

After only one night he wrought more slaughter and did not shrink from it, was too firmly set in it. Then it was easy to find the one who elsewhere, more commodiously, sought his rest at night, a bed among the hall-bowers, when the hate of the hellish fiend was shown to him truly by a clear sign. Thereafter, he who escaped the fiend kept himself further away and more securely. And so Grendel ruled and fought against right, one against all, until the best of houses stood empty. A long time passed - twelve winters did the friend of the Scyldings suffer every woe, immense sorrows. Therefore, it became openly known and acknowledged to the children of men in songs sadly that Grendel warred with Hrothgar for a long while, committed violence and enmity, ceaseless strife and sin, for many half-years. He wanted no peace with any man of the Danish forces, nor would he withdraw the life-bale or settle for tribute [interesting, this suggests diplomacy with grendel], nor did any of the wise counselors need to expect bright compensation from the slayer's hands. The terrible fierce ravager, a dark shadow of death, pursued both old and young warriors, lurked, lay in wait. He ruled the misty moors by night. Men do not know where such hellish demons wander on their errands. Thus, many crimes did the foe of mankind, the awful lone roamer, often accomplish - harsh humiliations. He dwelt in Heorot, the richly decorated hall, in the dark nights, yet he could not approach the gift-throne, nor did he know the warmth of kinship.

That was a great misery for the friend of the Scyldings, heart-breaking sorrow. Many mighty men often sat in council, deliberated what would be best for stouthearted men to do against the sudden attacks. Sometimes they vowed sacrifices at their shrines, prayed aloud that the gods themselves might aid them against their people's affliction. Such was their custom.

So the son of Healfdene kept brooding continually over the time of troubles; the wise hero could not deflect the woe. The strife was too severe, too loathsome and long-lasting, that had come upon the people, dire affliction, greatest of night-evils.

That was made known to Hygelac's thane in his homeland, a brave man among the Geats, of Grendel's deeds. He was the mightiest in manhood of the human race in the day of this life, noble and stalwart. He bade a good wave-traverser to be made ready for him, declared he would seek out the war-king over the swan's riding, the renowned prince, since he had need of men. That adventure was little begrudged by sage men, though he was dear to them; they urged on the stout-hearted man, examined the omens [interesting to have omens]. The worthy man had chosen champions of the Geatish people, the boldest he could find; with fourteen others, he went to seek the sea-wood. A warrior, a man crafty in lakes, pointed out the landmarks.

Time passed on; the boat was on the waves, the craft under the cliffs. The eager warriors climbed up the prow; currents swirled, sea against sand. Men bore into the bosom of the ship bright trappings, splendid war-gear. The men, the brave ones on their willing venture, shoved out the well-braced craft.

Then they went over the watery waves, the wind driving the foam-necked floater, much like a bird, until about the same time the next day the curved prow had journeyed on so that the seafarers could see land, the shining sea-cliffs, the steep headlands, the broad sea-nesses. Then the sea-crossing was accomplished at the edge of the ocean. The Geatish men went quickly up ashore, anchored the sea-wood, their shirts of mail and battle-sarks rattling. They thanked the gods that the sea-paths had been easy for them.

Then from the rampart the guard of the Scyldings, he who had the duty of watching the sea-cliffs, beheld them carrying across the gangway their bright shields, war-gear made ready. His mind was urged with curious thoughts as to who these men were. The thane of Hrothgar went down to the shore riding on horseback, powerfully brandishing a mighty spear in his hands. He spoke in formal words: "Who are you, armour-bearing men, protected by mail-coats, who have thus come leading a high ship over the sea-lane, hither over the waters? I have been the far-frontier guard so that no enemies with a ship-army might do harm to the land of the Danes. Never have shield-bearers more openly attempted to land here not knowing the password of our warriors. Moreover, I have never seen a mightier noble on earth than one of your band, a hero in armour. He is no mere retainer dignified by weapons unless his appearance, his peerless form, belies him. Now I must know your lineage [beowulf is shown to already look noble] before you go further with your false scouts into the land of the Danes. Now you far-dwellers, seafarers, hear my plain thought: it is advisable to make known promptly whence you have come."

The leader of the company answered him, unlocking his word-hoard: "We are of the Geatish nation and Hygelac's hearth-companions. My father, a noble commander, was well-known among the people; he was called Ecgtheow. He lived through many winters before he passed away, old [implying "not in battle"], from the courts; nearly every wise man readily remembers him throughout the world. We have come with friendly hearts to seek your lord, the son of Healfdene, protector of the people. Be good counsel to us! We have a great errand to the renowned lord of the Danes; nothing shall be hidden there, I expect. You know if it is as we have heard tell for a truth, that among the Scyldings some kind of enemy, an unknown ravager, causes in the dark nights by terror the foulest of injuries, humiliation and slaughter. I may give Hrothgar sincere counsel through greatness of mind how he, the wise and good, may overcome the fiend - if a reversal of afflictions should ever befall him, relief come again, and the seethings of care turn cooler; or else he shall ever after suffer a time of tribulation, dire distress, for as long as the best of houses remains there in its lofty place."

The watchman spoke, sitting there on his steed, an officer undaunted: "A sharp shield-warrior, one who thinks well, should know the difference between words and deeds. I hear that this is a friendly band to the lord of the Scyldings. Go forth bearing weapons and equipment; I shall guide you. Likewise, I shall command my kinsmen thanes to guard your ship honorably against every foe until the curved-prowed craft bears you back over the sea-streams to Geatland, to those whom fate allows to come unharmed from the rush of battle."

Then they set out; the wide-bosomed ship rested on its mooring, fastened by its anchor chain. The images of boars [vivid symbolism] shone over the cheek-guards, gleaming and hardened by fire; the farrow kept watch in warlike mood. The men hurried on, hastening together, until they could discern the timbered hall, splendid and ornamented with gold. To earthdwellers, that was the most famous of buildings under the heavens; its radiance shone over many lands. Then the battle-brave man showed them the bright court of the bold ones that they might go straight to it; one of the warriors turned his horse, then said: "It is time for me to go. May the AllFather keep you safe in your undertakings. I will return to the sea to keep watch against hostile bands."

The street was paved with stone [this evokes a rich city, and not just a lonely hall], a path guiding the men forward. The war-gear gleamed, hard and hand-linked; the bright iron rings sang in their armor as they came walking to the hall in their terrible war-gear. Seaweary, they set their broad, powerful shields against the wall of the building, then sat down on the benches. Their mail-shirts, the war-garb of men, rattled; their spears stood in a row, the seamen's weapons assembled, tipped with gray at the ash shaft. The iron-clad troop was well-equipped with weapons.

Then a proud warrior asked the heroes about their origin: "From where have you carried your gold-plated shields, grey war-shirts and visored helmets, this pile of battle-shafts? I am Hrothgar's messenger and officer. I have never seen so impressive or courageous-looking a force of foreigners. I expect that you have sought out Hrothgar more from prowess than from exile, but out of daring." [a rude remark]

The renowned leader answered him, hard under his helm; then he spoke with formal words [a proper polite reaction to the bravado of the remark]: "We are Hygelac's table-companions; Beowulf is my name. I will tell my errand to the son of Healfdene, the renowned prince, to your lord, if he will allow us to greet him who is so good to men."

Wulfgar spoke - he was a prince of the Wendels, his courage had been proven to many, his wisdom and might: "I will ask the king of the Danes, the giver of rings, the renowned ruler, as you request, about your journey, and will make known to you swiftly what answer the good one thinks fitting to give me."

He turned quickly to where Hrothgar sat, old and extremely grey-haired [his age is put forward, this is a man drained of life], with his company of thanes; the valiant man went until he stood before the shoulders of the lord of the Danes - he knew the custom of nobility [another theme of the text, people act as they should and the narrator let us know so]. Wulfgar spoke to his beloved lord: "Here have arrived, come from afar over the expanse of the sea, men of the Geats. The warriors name their leader Beowulf. They make this petition, my lord, that they might exchange speech with you. Do not give them a hasty refusal of your answer, gracious Hrothgar! They seem from their war-gear worthy of the esteem of earls; indeed the chief who has led these battle-warriors here is powerful."

Hrothgar spoke, protector of the Scyldings: "I knew him when he was a child, his old father was named Ecgtheow, to whom at his home Hrethel the Geat gave his only daughter in marriage. His bold son has now come here, seeking a loyal friend. Indeed, seafarers who carried gifts from the Geats in thanks have said that he has thirty men's strength in his hand-grip, a mighty campaigner. The Gods have sent him to us, to the West-Danes, as I hope, against the terror of Grendel. I shall offer the good man treasures for his daring. Make haste, summon them inside to see the band of kinsmen together; tell them too in words that they are welcome to the Danish people."

Then Wulfgar went to the door and announced from inside: "My victorious lord, the prince of the East-Danes, bids me to tell you that he knows your lineage and that you brave men from over the sea-surges are welcome to him here. Now you may go in your war-gear [this is a mark of trust], under your helmets, to see Hrothgar; let your battle-shields, your wooden shafts, await here the outcome of your speech."

The mighty one arose with many a warrior around him, a powerful troop of thanes; some remained there to guard the war-gear as the brave one commanded. Together, led by him, they hastened under Heorot's roof; the man, courageous under his helmet, went on until he stood within the hall. Beowulf spoke - his corselet glinted on him, the linked war-shirt crafted by the smith's skills: "May you be well, Hrothgar! I am Hygelac's kinsman and young retainer [note that he does not introduce himself by his name, he is stilla young warrior who need to prove himself]. I have undertaken many a glorious deed already in my youth. This matter of Grendel was made known to me plainly when I was in my homeland. Seafarers say that this hall, the best of buildings, stands empty and useless to all as soon as evening light is hidden under the brightness of heaven. Then my people, the wisest men, the most excellent of counselors, advised me that I should seek you out, King Hrothgar, because they knew the strength of my might; they had seen me themselves returning bloodstained from foes, when I bound five, destroyed the family of giants, and slaughtered sea-monsters by night in the waves, breaking through the peril, avenging the Weders' woes - they had afflictions, the wretched people - grinding down the foul foe. And now alone I shall settle the affair with Grendel, the giant. I ask of you now, prince of the Bright-Danes, one sole request, protector of the Scyldings, that you do not refuse me, defender of warriors, friend of the people, now that I have come so far: that I alone with my band of earls, this hardy company, might cleanse Heorot. I have also learned that the monster in his recklessness does not care for weapons; I then - so that Hygelac my liege-lord may be glad of mind towards me - scorn to bear sword or broad shield, the yellow linden-wood [a nice touch of color in the story], into battle; but with my grip I shall grapple with the fiend and fight for life, foe against foe. There he whom death takes must trust in fate. I expect that if he can prevail in the war-hall he will fearlessly eat the Geatish people as he often has done with the might of the Hrethmen. You will have no need to bury my head, for he will have me bloodstained, if death bears me away; he will carry off my corpse intending to feast ruthlessly, the lone roamer will eat imperturbably, marking the moor-fen's stops; you need not for long then heed my life's sustenance [those are grisly description of his own potential death]. Send to Hygelac, if battle takes me, the best of war-garments that guards my breast, finest of mail-coats; it is an heirloom of Hrethel's and the work of Weland. Fate always goes as it must!"

Hrothgar spoke, protector of the Scyldings: "You have sought us out, my friend Beowulf, and come for defence and out of generosity. Your father fought the greatest feud, he was Heatholaf's killer among the Wylfings; the Geat people could not keep him for dread of war. Thence he sought the South-Danes' folk over the rolling of the waves, the Honor-Scyldings, when I first ruled the Danish folk and held in my youth the rich kingdom, the treasure-burg of heroes - Heregar was dead then, my elder brother lifeless; he was a better man than I! Afterward I settled that feud with fees; I sent to the Wylfings over the waters' ridge ancient treasures; your father swore oaths to me [this introduces interesting things on the rapport between Beowulf's father and the king].

It is a sorrow for me to tell any man what humiliation Grendel has brought me in Heorot with his malice, his sudden attacks. My hall-troop, my warrior-band, is melted away; fate has swept them away into Grendel's terror. The gods may easily hinder the deeds of that mad ravager. Very often warriors, when flushed with beer, have boasted over their cups that they would await Grendel's attack in the beer-hall with the terror of blades [this contrasts with the sober Beowulf describing his own death]. Then in the morning when daylight shone this mead-hall was stained with gore, all the bench-timber drenched in blood, the hall gory with sword-blood [blood everywhere]. I had all the fewer loyal men, dear retainers, for death had taken them away.

Sit now at the feast and unbind your thoughts, your hopes to the thanes, as your heart tells you."
