GIVING, BESTOWING GIFTS.

Be generous with those whom you have an abundance,
or who will never make use of it,
grant them privileges.

Let no teacher instruct his student in such a way that the student does not hope
to be able to learn something more. Nor should a parent give so much to his child
that the child either lacks no favor or cannot hope for anything more. The same applies to a lord concerning his servant, when estates are given, they should be those that
require the lord's grace, e.g. lacking wood, water, or a mill.

If a contract or gift is made,
a clause should be added, so that it can be revoked at the lord's discretion.

If someone is worthy of public office and refuses to accept it when offered, urge them to accept it for a while, and once they have undertaken its administration, involve them in matters so that they cannot easily abandon it: without the loss of honor or profit of some kind, the loss of which they would bear with difficulty.

Grace should be given in such a way that you lose nothing,
but, for example, forgive owed penalties as a reward, or impose new taxes,
which otherwise you would have imposed less justly following the example of your neighbors.

Do not use overly valuable items yourself, such as weapons, horses, rings, etc., so that you can give them as great gifts at little loss to yourself.

Do not use common ways of giving, but, for example, give a musket, take care to fire it at a target, and then give it to the victorious thrower, or willingly lose it in a game.

If you want to give a pleasing gift to someone, do not promise it, for they will decline; to promise is to ask for an excuse, or at least to be bought with entreaties. He gives twice who gives quickly.

Those who praise their possessions in front of others invite them to ask for those possessions.

Things that your predecessors have established should not easily be harmed, for they foresaw what you do not notice. Do not easily grant perpetual favors, as circumstances may change, and you will not be able to do more.

Do not appear to throw away your gifts, nor try to raise their price to make them more pleasing. Observe who is driven by what necessities and when; and if you have benefited others, do not tell others; you will offend, and you will seem to reproach them: and if you are forced to speak, say that it was owed, and not to expect thanks or acceptance for it. If something is given to you (even if it is the smallest), beware of being ungrateful.
